W-13817421 Schema Definition (#354)
mulesoft/docs-gateway: gateway/1.5/modules/ROOT/pages/policies-pdk-create-schema-definition.adoc

* `category`: The category the policy appears under. Supported values are: `security`, `compliance`, `transformation`, `quality of service`, and `troubleshooting`. 

For example:

[source,yaml]
----
metadata:
    labels:
        title: Json Threat Protection
        description: Protects against malicious JSON in API requests.
        category: Security
----

`labels` are suggested but not required.

== Define Parameters

To add parameters, edit `spec.properties` section  in the `gcl.yaml` file.

For example:

[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    username:
        type: string
    password:
        type: string
----

After defining your properties, you can:

* <<define-required-properties-and-default-values>>
* <<define-supported-types>>

=== Define Required Properties and Default Values

For each property in the `gcl.yaml` file, you can define the property as `required` and set a `default` value.

You define properities as required by listing them in the `spec.required` object. For example, the following policy requires a `password` but not `username`:

[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    username:
        type: string
    password:
        type: string

> Required:

Reviewer: lowercase on the 'required'

    - password
----

In this configuration example, configuring a policy without a password results in a failed configuration.

You can also define a default value for a property. For Example:

[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    username:
        type: string
        default: user1
    password:
        type: string
        default: 12345678

> Required:

Reviewer: idem

| `{"username": "user2"}` | `{"password": "12345678", +
"username": "user2"}` | Success
| `{"password": "password"}` | `{"password": "password"}` | Success
| `{"password": "password", +
 "username": "user2"}` | `{"password": "password", +
"username": "user2"}` | Success
|===

=== Define Supported Types

You can define a supported data type for each policy parameter to ensure the policy receives the correct data.

The supported types are:

String::
+
The string type specifies that the data is text.
+
[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    password:
        type: string
----
+
The `string` type also supports enables you to configure a `format` type. 
+
The supported formating types are:
+
* `uri`: Specifies the expected text is a URI
* `ip-range`: Specifies the expected text is a range or IPs
* `dataweave`: specifies the expected text is a dataweave variable
+
Defining a string as the `uri` or `ip-range` provides additional validations, but defining a string as `dataweave` notifies Flex Gateway that the input must be transformed. For more information about supported Dataweave transformations, see xref:policies-flex-dataweave-support.adoc[].
+

> The following yaml snippit demonstrates all string formats:

Reviewer: snippet

= Defining a Policy Schema Definition
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:imagesdir: ../assets/images

> Similar to the policies listed in the xref:policies-included-directory.adoc[], custom policies also have configuration paramaters. Configuration parameters enable you to improve the usability of you custom policy and support a wider range of API configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar to the policies listed in the xref:policies-included-directory.adoc[], custom policies have configuration parameters. Use the configuration parameters to improve the usability of your custom policy and support a wider range of API configurations.
```

> You define your own custom configuration parameters by editing the `definition/gcl.yaml` file. The `gcl.yaml` file is written in Gateway Configuration Language (GCL). However, you do not need prior GCL knowledge to use this tutorial.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To define custom configuration parameters, edit the `definition/gcl.yaml` file. The `gcl.yaml` file is written in Gateway Configuration Language (GCL). However, you do not need prior GCL knowledge to use this tutorial.
```

> The configuration parameters you define in the `gcl.yaml` appear as variables in the `src/generated/config.rs` file after you run the `build-asset-file` command. You set any user input you need for writing the rust source code in the `gcl.yaml` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration parameters you define in the `gcl.yaml` appear as variables in the `src/generated/config.rs` file after you run the `build-asset-file` command. You set any user input you need for writing the Rust source code in the `gcl.yaml` file.
```

> Additionally, the configuration parameters appear in the API Manager UI when applying a policy to Flex Gateway in Connected Mode. When applying the policy to Flex Gateway running in Local Mode, it is your responsibility to distribute a configuration `yaml` file for your policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configuration parameters appear in the API Manager UI when applying a policy to Flex Gateway running in Connected Mode. When applying the policy to Flex Gateway running in Local Mode, it is your responsibility to distribute a configuration `yaml` file for your policy.
```

> The default `gcl.yaml` file appears as the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default `gcl.yaml` file has the following content:
```

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com.v1alpha1
kind: Extension
metadata:
    labels:
        title: my-custom-policy
        category: Security 
spec:
    extends:
        - name: extension-definition
    properties: 
        stringProperty: 
        type: string
----

The `gcl.yaml` file contains two sections:

* `metadate`: Defines information about the policy
* `properties`: Defines the policy's configuration parameters

To define a schema definition:

. <<define-metadata>>
. <<define-parameters>>
. <<use-custom-parameters-in-rust-source-code>>

== Define Metadata

> By adding labels in the metadata section, you can enrich the data shown in the UI when applying the policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add labels in the metadata section to enrich the data shown in the UI when applying the policy.
```

To define the metadata, edit the `metadata` in the `gcl.yaml` file.

The supported labels are:

> * `name`: The policy name that appears in the UI
> * `description`: A brief explanation of the policy's behavior
> * `category`: The category the policy appears under. Supported values are: `security`, `compliance`, `transformation`, `quality of service`, and `troubleshooting`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `name`: The policy name that appears in the UI.
* `description`: A brief explanation of the policy's behavior.
* `category`: The category the policy appears under. Supported values are: `security`, `compliance`, `transformation`, `quality of service`, and `troubleshooting`. 
```
Adjusted punctuation to be consistent with the last item

For example:

[source,yaml]
----
metadata:
    labels:
        title: Json Threat Protection
        description: Protects against malicious JSON in API requests.
        category: Security
----

`labels` are suggested but not required.

== Define Parameters

> To add parameters, edit `spec.properties` section  in the `gcl.yaml` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To add parameters, edit the `spec.properties` section in the `gcl.yaml` file.
```

For example:

[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    username:
        type: string
    password:
        type: string
----

After defining your properties, you can:

* <<define-required-properties-and-default-values>>
* <<define-supported-types>>

=== Define Required Properties and Default Values

> For each property in the `gcl.yaml` file, you can define the property as `required` and set a `default` value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can define each property listed in the `gcl.yaml` file as `required` and set a `default` value for the property.
```

> You define properities as required by listing them in the `spec.required` object. For example, the following policy requires a `password` but not `username`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To define properties as required, list them in the `spec.required` object. For example, the following policy requires a `password` but not a `username`:
```

[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    username:
        type: string
    password:
        type: string
required:
    - password
----

In this configuration example, configuring a policy without a password results in a failed configuration.

> You can also define a default value for a property. For Example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example defines a default value for each property:
```

[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    username:
        type: string
        default: user1
    password:
        type: string
        default: 12345678
required:
    - password
----

> Defining a default value for a required property means that if the field is left blank when configuring the policy, the parameter is set to the default value. Defining a default value for a parameter that isn't required, means that the default value appears as a suggested value in the UI. If a non-required parameter with a default value is left blank during configuration, there is no configured value for the parameters. In the following configuration table, if the policy was applied in API Manager, `user1` would appear as a suggested value for `username` but does not affect if the value is configured:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you don't set a value for a required property when configuring a policy, the property uses the default value. The UI suggests the configured default value for properties that are not required. If you don't specify the value for non-required properties, the property does not use the default value. 

In the following configuration table, if the policy was applied in API Manager, `user2` would appear as a suggested value for `username` but does not affect if the value is configured:
```
I tried to make this sentence a bit more clear and less wordy, please check if it is Ok before applying the suggestion. I also changed the value from user1 to user2 to match the example, not sure if that's right.

[a,a,a]
|===
| Policy Configuration | Effective Configuration | Configuration Status
| `{}` | `{"password": "12345678"}` | Success
| `{"username": "user2"}` | `{"password": "12345678", +
"username": "user2"}` | Success
| `{"password": "password"}` | `{"password": "password"}` | Success
| `{"password": "password", +
 "username": "user2"}` | `{"password": "password", +
"username": "user2"}` | Success
|===

=== Define Supported Types

> You can define a supported data type for each policy parameter to ensure the policy receives the correct data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Define a supported data type for each policy parameter to ensure the policy receives the correct data.
```

        type: integer
        default: 10
----
+
Boolean::
+
The `boolean` type specifies data as a boolean value. Supported values are `true` or `false`.
For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    skipValidation:
        type: boolean
        default: false
    requireCredentials:
        type: boolean
        default: true
----
+
Array::
+
The `array` type specifies the data as a list of ordered elements. For the `array` type, you must also specify `items.type` to specify the data type of the items in the array.
+
For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    scopes:
        type: array
        items:
            type: string
        default: ["READ", "WRITE"]
----
+
Object::
+
The `object` type specifies the data as a list of ordered elements with multiple properties. For the `object` type, you must also specify `properties.type` for each element in the object.
+
For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
properties:
    user:
      type: object
      properties:
        id:
          type: string
        name:
          type: string
      required:
        - id
        - name
      default: {"id": "1", "name": "John Doe"}
----

== Use Custom Parameters in Rust Source Code

> After you modify the `gcl.yaml` file you can propagate the changes to the `src/generated/config.rs` rust file and the json schema for the UI by running the `build-asset-files` command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you modify the `gcl.yaml` file, run the `build-asset-files` command to propagate the changes to the `src/generated/config.rs` rust file and the JSON schema for the UI:
```

[source,cmd]
----
make build-asset-files
----

> Additionally compiling the project with the `build` command also propagates the changes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, compiling the project with the `build` command also propagates the changes:
```

[source,cmd]
----
make build
----

For more information about compiling your policy, see xref:policies-pdk-compile-policies.adoc[].

> Properties defined in the `gcl.yaml` files are mapped to the rust data types in the `config.rs` rust file as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Properties defined in the `gcl.yaml` files are mapped to the Rust data types in the `config.rs` Rust file as follows:
```
I'm marking Rust as uppercase assuming this is talking about the programming language. Please confirm if this is correct.

[a,a]
|===
| gcl.yaml | config.rs

| `string` | `String`
| `uri` string | `String`
| `ip-range` string | `String`
| `dataveave` string | `pdk::api::expression::Expression`
| `number` | `f64`
| `integer` | `i64`
| `boolean` | `bool`
| `array` | `vec` containing the specified item type
| `object` | `struct` containing the specified property types
|===

[IMPORTANT] 
----

> If a parameter in `gcl.yaml` is not defined as ‘required’, the parameters counterpart in the `config.rs` is wrapped in an ‘Option’ object.
> 
> Validate the the parameter is present before unwrapping. Unwrapping a parameter that is not present may cause a `panic!`.
> 
> You can use one of the following validation examples to ensure the parameter is present:
> 
> * `if let Some(val) = myValue`
> * `if myValue.is_ome() {myValue.unwrap()}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a parameter in `gcl.yaml` is not defined as ‘required’, the parameter's counterpart in the `config.rs` is wrapped in an ‘Option’ object.

Validate that the parameter is present before unwrapping. Unwrapping a parameter that is not present may cause a `panic!`.

Use one of the following validation examples to ensure the parameter is present:

* `if let Some(val) = myValue`
* `if myValue.is_ome() {myValue.unwrap()}`
```
